Added signing and verification workflows (#122)
notaryproject/notaryproject: signing-and-verification-workflow.md

# Signing and Verification Workflow

This document describes how Notary v2 signs and verifies OCI artifacts.

## Signing workflow

> The user wants to sign a locally available OCI artifact and push it to a repository(along with signature).

Reviewer: I think we can remove "locally" as this is one option. I realize this has evolved a bit from the original requirements.
For example, the artifact can be pushed to the registry, and a signature is subsequently pushed to the registry. 
The sign local is an option, but not required.

Author: updated to remove locally.

### Prerequisite

> - User has access to the signing certificate and private key.

Reviewer: I've seen concern with the term "access". The signing cert may be in a remote, secured location, the user "has access", but can't take the private certificate.

Suggestion:
- User has access to the signing certificate private key or a remote signing service through a notation plug-in.

### Steps

1. **Generate signature:** Using notation CLI or any other compliant signing tool, sign the OCI artifact. The signing tool should follow the following guideline.

>     1. Verify that the signing certificate is valid and satisfies [certificate requirements](./signature-specification.md#certificate-requirements).

Reviewer: While I agree in concept, is this a requirement of the notation client? Is the notation client expected to "verify..."? Or, are we saying

> The signing certificate MUST satisfy the [certificate requirements](./signature-specification.md#certificate-requirements).

Author: This document depicts all the steps required for signature generation and verification. Also, the compliant client MUST perform these steps. 

I am not sure how to combine workflow and specification/requirement so wrote the complete doc as workflow/control-flow document. Also, its easier to read and follow workflow than specification.

>     1. Verify that the signing algorithm satisfies [algorithm requirements](./signature-specification.md#signature-algorithm-requirements).

Reviewer: > The signing algorithm MUST implement the Notary v2 [algorithm requirements](./signature-specification.md#signature-algorithm-requirements).

    1. Generate signature.
        1. Generate signature using signature formats specified in [supported signature envelopes](./signature-specification.md#supported-signature-envelopes).
        1. Obtain an [RFC-3161](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3161.html) compliant timestamp for the signature generated in the previous step. This step is optional but recommended.

>             1. Verify that the timestamp signing certificate satisfies [certificate requirements](./signature-specification.md#certificate-requirements).

Reviewer: > If provided, the timestamp signing certificate MUST satisfy [certificate requirements](./signature-specification.md#certificate-requirements).

>             1. Verify that the timestamp signing algorithm satisfies [algorithm requirements](./signature-specification.md#signature-algorithm-requirements).

Reviewer: > The timestamp signing algorithm MUST satisfy the Notary v2 [algorithm requirements](./signature-specification.md#signature-algorithm-requirements).

        1. Embed timestamp to the signature envelope.
1. **Push the signature envelope:** Push the signature envelope generated in the previous step to the repository.
1. **Generate signature artifact manifest:** As decribed in [signature specification](./signature-specification.md#storage) create the Notary v2 signature artifact manifest for the signature envelope generated in step 1.
1. **Push signature artifact manifest:** Push Notary v2 signature artifact manifest to the repository.

> The user can push the OCI artifact to the repository before, after, or in between the signature generation process.

Reviewer: As a signature is pushed, it includes a `subject` property of the artifact it's signing. That artifact must exist in the registry for the push to succeed. See: [ORAS Artifact Push Validation](https://github.com/oras-project/artifacts-spec/blob/main/artifact-manifest.md#push-validation)

Suggested text:
> The user pushes the OCI artifact to the repository before the signature generation process as the signature reference must exist for the signature push to succeed. See: [ORAS Artifact Push Validation](https://github.com/oras-project/artifacts-spec/blob/main/artifact-manifest.md#push-validation) for more info.

## Verification workflow

> The user wants to pull OCI artifacts only if they are signed by the trusted publisher and the signature is valid.

Reviewer: Nit:

> The user wants to pull an OCI artifact only if they are signed by a trusted publisher and the signature is valid.

### Prerequisites

> - User has a digest of OCI artifact they want to download. If the user wants to use a tag to identify the artifact then that tag must be resolved to digest.

Reviewer: We support tag references, which are converted to digests. We don't want to force the user to do the conversion themselves.
Suggestion:
> User has a fully qualified reference to an OCI artifact they want to pull. If a tag is provided, the tag is looked up and converted to a digest.

- User has configured [trust store and trust policy](./trust-store-trust-policy-specification.md) required for signature verification.

### Steps

> 1. **Get signature artifact descriptors:** Using the ORAS [Manifest Referrers API](https://github.com/oras-project/artifacts-spec/blob/main/manifest-referrers-api.md) download  Notary v2 signature artifact descriptors. The ORAS referrers API only needs artifact digest and artifact type(optional) as input. The Notary v2 signature's artifact type is `application/vnd.cncf.notary.v2.signature`.

Reviewer: Nit:
> **Get signature artifact descriptors:** Using the ORAS [Manifest Referrers API](https://github.com/oras-project/artifacts-spec/blob/main/manifest-referrers-api.md) download the Notary v2 signature artifact descriptors. The ORAS referrers API only needs the artifact digest and `artifactType` (optional) as input. The Notary v2 signature's artifact type is `application/vnd.cncf.notary.v2.signature`.

1. **Get signature artifact manifests:** For each signature artifact descriptor, perform the following steps:
    1. **Get signature artifact manifests:** Download the Notary v2 signature's artifact manifests for the given artifact descriptor.
    1. **Filter signature artifact manifests:**

>         1. Based on the value of the `blobs->mediaType` attribute and supported signature envelope format, filter out signature manifests.

Reviewer: I'm not quite following the step here.
Once the user has the manifest, they download the blob for the signature payload. Today, we only have one format, so I'm not sure we need to call out filtering as we haven't identified if we'll have multiple blobs in a single signature or multiple signatures for different formats.

Author: Added it for backward compatibility so that in the future if we have multiple signature formats we don't break existing clients.

Reviewer 2: Can you elaborate in the in the workflow about why this is done.

>         1. Depending upon the trust-store configuration, further filter out signature manifests. why? How? **TBD**(See [signature filtering](https://hackmd.io/@pritesh/signature_filtering)).

Reviewer: I think this is referring to picking the right signature, based on the policy.
Example: the `net-monitor:v1` image has a wabbit-networks, docker hub and acme-rockets signature. Which one(s) are required for validation, based on the trust store policy.

Author: Yep, that's correct.

    1. **Get and validate signatures:** On filtered Notary v2 signature artifact manifest, perform the following steps:
        1. Download the signature envelope.
        1. Validate the signature envelope using trust-store and trust-policy as mentioned in [signature evaluation](./trust-store-trust-policy-specification.md#signature-evaluation) section.

>         1. If signature validation fails, skip the below steps and move to the next signature artifact descriptor(step 2.1). If all signature artifact manifests have already been processed, fail the signature verification and exit.

Reviewer: What constitutes a signature validation success/failure? Is this where we should call out checking for revocation lists, and/or timestamp validations?

Author: That's specified in the previous step and the hyperlink points to the signature evaluation process.

> Validate the signature envelope using trust-store and trust-policy as mentioned in [signature evaluation](./trust-store-trust-policy-specification.md#signature-evaluation) section

# Signing and Verification Workflow

This document describes how Notary v2 signs and verifies OCI artifacts.

## Signing workflow

The user wants to sign an OCI artifact and push the signature to a repository.

### Prerequisite

- User has access to the signing certificate and private key or a remote signing service through a notation plug-in.

### Steps

1. **Generate signature:** Using notation CLI or any other compliant signing tool, sign the OCI artifact. The signing tool should follow the following guideline.
    1. Verify that the signing certificate is valid and satisfies [certificate requirements](./signature-specification.md#certificate-requirements).
    1. Verify that the signing algorithm satisfies [algorithm requirements](./signature-specification.md#signature-algorithm-requirements).
    1. Generate signature.
        1. Generate signature using signature formats specified in [supported signature envelopes](./signature-specification.md#supported-signature-envelopes).

>         1. Obtain an [RFC-3161](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3161.html) compliant timestamp for the signature generated in the previous step. This step is optional but recommended.

Reviewer 2: This should be based on if user configured use of TSA. One way would be to add additional config options in Notation key definition to enable TSA and specify TSA server.

Author: Reworded to `1. If the user wants to timestamp the signature, obtain an [RFC-3161](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3161.html) compliant timestamp for the signature generated in the previous step. Otherwise, continue to the next step.`

            1. Verify that the timestamp signing certificate satisfies [certificate requirements](./signature-specification.md#certificate-requirements).
            1. Verify that the timestamp signing algorithm satisfies [algorithm requirements](./signature-specification.md#signature-algorithm-requirements).
        1. Embed timestamp to the signature envelope.
1. **Push the signature envelope:** Push the signature envelope generated in the previous step to the repository.
1. **Generate signature artifact manifest:** As decribed in [signature specification](./signature-specification.md#storage) create the Notary v2 signature artifact manifest for the signature envelope generated in step 1.
1. **Push signature artifact manifest:** Push Notary v2 signature artifact manifest to the repository.

The user pushes the OCI artifact to the repository before the signature generation process as the signature reference must exist for the signature push to succeed. See: [ORAS Artifact Push Validation](https://github.com/oras-project/artifacts-spec/blob/main/artifact-manifest.md#push-validation) for more info.

> ## Verification workflow

Reviewer 3: If `skipSignatureVerification` in the corresponding trust policy is set to `true`, do we need to do the verification workflow at all?

Author: No, we don't need to. I was waiting for scoping PR to get merged but as we have LGTM on the scoping PR will update this PR to account for `skipSignatureVerification`

The user wants to pull an OCI artifact only if they are signed by a trusted publisher and the signature is valid.

### Prerequisites

> - User has a fully qualified reference to an OCI artifact they want to pull. If a tag is provided, the tag is looked up and converted to a digest.

Reviewer 2: Notation will accept a url with tag and construct the descriptor from downloaded manifest, the registry maps tag to digest and send the artifact manifest as response.

Author: Because of security concerns around the value of resolved tag being different during signature verification and actual pull, for this PR we won't support automatic conversion of the tag to digest inside notary.

- User has configured [trust store and trust policy](./trust-store-trust-policy-specification.md) required for signature verification.

### Steps

> 1. **Get signature artifact descriptors:** Using the ORAS [Manifest Referrers API](https://github.com/oras-project/artifacts-spec/blob/main/manifest-referrers-api.md) download the Notary v2 signature artifact descriptors. The ORAS referrers API only needs the artifact digest and `artifactType`(optional) as input. The Notary v2 signature's artifact type is `application/vnd.cncf.notary.v2.signature`.

Reviewer 2: I'd reword to say that Notation will call referrers API with digest and artifactType as `application/vnd.cncf.notary.v2.signature`, we need describe the referrers api which is already linked.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Get signature artifact descriptors:** Using the ORAS [Manifest Referrers API](https://github.com/oras-project/artifacts-spec/blob/main/manifest-referrers-api.md) download the Notary v2 signature artifact descriptors. The  `artifactType` parameter is set to Notary v2 signature's artifact type `application/vnd.cncf.notary.v2.signature`. Note that all ORAS implementations may not support filtering using `artifactType`.
```

1. **Get signature artifact manifests:** For each signature artifact descriptor, perform the following steps:
    1. **Get signature artifact manifests:** Download the Notary v2 signature's artifact manifests for the given artifact descriptor.

>     1. **Filter signature artifact manifests:**

Reviewer 2: s/manifests/manifest ?

        1. Based on the value of the `blobs->mediaType` attribute and supported signature envelope format, filter out signature manifests.
        1. Depending upon the trust-store configuration, further filter out signature manifests. why? How? **TBD**(See [signature filtering](https://hackmd.io/@pritesh/signature_filtering)).
        1. If the artifact manifest is filtered out, skip the below steps and move to the next signature artifact descriptor(step 2.1). If all signature artifact descriptors have already been processed, fail the signature verification and exit.

>     1. **Get and validate signatures:** On filtered Notary v2 signature artifact manifest, perform the following steps:

Reviewer 2: Nit, s/On filtered/On the filtered
s/validate/verify - for this whole section.

        1. Download the signature envelope.
        1. Validate the signature envelope using trust-store and trust-policy as mentioned in [signature evaluation](./trust-store-trust-policy-specification.md#signature-evaluation) section.
        1. If signature validation fails, skip the below steps and move to the next signature artifact descriptor(step 2.1). If all signature artifact manifests have already been processed, fail the signature verification and exit.

>         1. If signature validation succeeds, compare the given digest with the signed digest present in the signature envelope's payload. If digests are equal, signature verification is considered successful. Otherwise, move to the next signature artifact descriptor(step 2.1). If all signature artifact descriptors have already been processed, fail the signature verification and exit.

Reviewer 2: It's unclear what "given digest" mean, can be more descriptive here.

Author: Updated.

> 1. **Get OCI artifact:** Using the given digest, download the OCI artifact. This step is not in the purview of Notary v2.

Reviewer 2: s/given/verified

> 1. **Get OCI artifact:** Using the verified digest, download the OCI artifact. This step is not in the purview of Notary v2.

Reviewer 3: The signed payload of a signature contains the descriptor of the target OCI artifact, which includes digest, size, and media type.

Instead of `using the verified digest`, we should say `using the verified descriptor`.

Author: Have mentioned digest instead of descriptor because we haven't verified the descriptor inside the signature envelope with the actual OCI artifact's descriptor (the one stored in the registry).

- User has configured [trust store and trust policy](./trust-store-trust-policy-specification.md) required for signature verification.

### Steps

1. **Should Notary v2 verify the signature? :** Depending upon [trust-policy](./trust-store-trust-policy-specification.md#trust-policy) configuration, determine whether Notary v2 needs to verify the signature or not. If signature verification should be skipped for the given artifact, skip the below steps and directly jump to step 4.
1. **Get signature artifact descriptors:** Using the ORAS [Manifest Referrers API](https://github.com/oras-project/artifacts-spec/blob/main/manifest-referrers-api.md) download the Notary v2 signature artifact descriptors. The  `artifactType` parameter is set to Notary v2 signature's artifact type `application/vnd.cncf.notary.v2.signature`. Note that all ORAS implementations may not support filtering using `artifactType`.
1. For each signature artifact descriptor, perform the following steps:
    1. **Get signature artifact manifest:** Download the Notary v2 signature's artifact manifest for the given artifact descriptor.
    1. **Filter signature artifact manifest:**

>         1. Filter out the unsupported signature envelope format by comparing the value of the `blobs->mediaType` attribute of the signature manifest with the supported formats defined in [signature specification](./signature-specification.md#storage).

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/oras-project/artifacts-spec/blob/main/artifact-manifest.md 

```suggestion
        1. Filter out the unsupported signature formats by comparing the signature envelope format type (`[descriptors].descriptor.mediaType`) in the signature manifest, with the supported formats defined in [signature specification](./signature-specification.md#storage).
```
